# Exponential Generating Function

## Definition of exponential generating function

For a real number sequence $a_0, a_1, a_2, a_3, ...$
$$f(x) = a_0 + a_1x + a_2\frac{x^2}{2!} + a_3\frac{x^3}{3!} + ... = \sum_{i=0}^{\infty}a_i\frac{x^i}{i!}$$
is called the **exponential generating function** for the given sequence.

### Example

Examining the Maclaurin series expansion for $e^x$, we find
$$e^x = 1 + x + \frac{x^2}{2!} + \frac{x^3}{3!} + ... = \sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\frac{x^i}{i!}$$
Therefore, $e^x$ is the exponential generating function for the sequence $1, 1, 1, ...$, and is the ordinary generating function for the sequence $1, 1, 1/2!, 1/3!, ....$

#### Arranging 4 Letters in ENGINE

The word ENGINE consists of 2 'E's, 2 'N's, 1 'I', and 1 'G'.

To find the number of ways to arrange four letters from ENGINE, we use an exponential generating function. For each 'E' and 'N', we employ the term $[1 + x + (x^2/2!)]$ to account for the possible arrangements (0, 1, or 2 occurrences). For 'G' and 'I', the term used is $(1+x)$.

The exponential generating function is given by:
$$f(x) = [1 + x + (x^2/2!)]^2 (1+x)^2$$

The desired answer is the coefficient of $x^4/4!$ in $f(x)$.

Breaking down the expansion of $f(x)$, we find three significant contributions to $x^4/4!$:

1. From the product $(x^2/2!)(x^2/2!)(1)(1)$, we obtain $4!/(2!2!)$. The coefficient is $4!/(2!2!) = 6$.
2. From the product $(x^2/2!)(1)(x)(x)$, we get $4!/2!$. There are $\binom{2}{1}\binom{3}{2}$ ways to arrange this product. Therefore, the coefficient is $6(4!/2!) = 72$.
3. The product $(x)(x)(x)(x)$ contributes $4!$ to the coefficient.

The total coefficient for $x^4/4!$ in the expansion of $f(x)$ is $6 + 72 + 24 = 102$. Hence, there are 102 ways to arrange four letters from ENGINE.

---

## Maclaurin series expansions of $e^x$ and $e^{-x}$

The Maclaurin series expansions for $e^x$ and $e^{-x}$ are given by:  

$e^x = 1 + x + \frac{x^2}{2!} + \frac{x^3}{3!} + \frac{x^4}{4!} + ...$  
$e^{-x} = 1 - x + \frac{x^2}{2!} - \frac{x^3}{3!} + \frac{x^4}{4!} - ...$  

Adding these series together, we get:
$$e^x + e^{-x} = 2(1 + \frac{x^2}{2!} + \frac{x^4}{4!} + ...)$$
Or equivalently:
$$\frac{e^x + e^{-x}}{2} = 1 + \frac{x^2}{2!} + \frac{x^4}{4!} + ...$$
Subtracting $e^{-x}$ from $e^x$ yields:
$$\frac{e^x - e^{-x}}{2} = x + \frac{x^3}{3!} + \frac{x^5}{5!} + ...$$

### Example

A ship carries 48 flags, 12 each of the colors red, white, blue, and black. Twelve of these flags are placed on a vertical pole in order to communicate a signal to other ships.

#### How many of these signals use an even number of blue flags and an odd number of black flags?

We can model the signals using the exponential generating function:

$$f(x) = \left(1 + x + \frac{x^2}{2!} + \frac{x^3}{2!} + \ldots \right)^2 \left(1 + \frac{x^2}{2!} + \frac{x^4}{4!} + \ldots\right) \left(x + \frac{x^3}{3!} + \frac{x^5}{5!} + \ldots \right)$$

This function considers all signals made up of $n$ flags, where $n \geq 1$. The last two factors in $f(x)$ restrict the signals to an even number of blue flags and an odd number of black flags, respectively.

Simplifying $f(x)$, we get:

$$\begin{aligned}
f(x) &= (e^x)^2(\frac{e^x + e^{-x}}{2})(\frac{e^x - e^{-x}}{2}) \\
&=e^{2x} (\frac{e^{2x} - e^{-2x}}{4}) \\
&=\frac{1}{4}(e^{4x} - 1) = \frac{1}{4}(\sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\frac{(4x)^i}{i!} - 1)
\end{aligned}$$

The coefficient of $x^{12}/12!$ in $f(x)$ yields $\frac{1}{4} \times 4^{12} = 4^{11}$ signals made up of 12 flags with an even number of blue flags and an odd number of black flags.

#### How many of the signals have at least three white flags or no white flags at all?

For this scenario, we use the exponential generating function:

$$g(x) = \left(1 + x + \frac{x^2}{2!} + \frac{x^3}{3!} \ldots \right)^3 \left(1 + \frac{x^3}{3!} + \frac{x^4}{4!} + \ldots \right)$$

Simplifying $g(x)$, we get:

$$\begin{aligned}
g(x) &= (1 + x + \frac{x^2}{2!} + \frac{x^3}{3!} ...)^3 (1 + \frac{x^3}{3!} + \frac{x^4}{4!} + ...) \\
&=(e^x)^3 (e^x - x - \frac{x^2}{2!}) \\
&=e^{4x} - xe^{3x} - \frac{x^2}{2!}e^{3x}\\
&=\sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\frac{(4x)^i}{i!} - x\sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\frac{(3x)^i}{i!} - \frac{x^2}{2}\sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\frac{(3x)^i}{i!}\end{aligned}$$

Here, the factor $\left(1 + \frac{x^3}{3!} + \frac{x^4}{4!} + \ldots \right) = e^x - x - \frac{x^2}{2!}$ in $g(x)$ restricts the signals to those that contain three or more of the 12 white flags or none at all. The coefficient of $x^{12}/12!$ in $g(x)$ is determined by considering each summand:

- $\displaystyle \sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\frac{(4x)^i}{i!}$: The coefficient of $x^{12}/12!$ is $4^{12}$.
- $\displaystyle x\sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\frac{(3x)^i}{i!}$: The coefficient is $(12)(3^{11})$.
- $\displaystyle (x^2/2)\sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\frac{(3x)^i}{i!}$: The coefficient is $(6)(11)(3^{10})$.

Therefore, the number of 12-flag signals with at least three white flags or none at all is:

$$4^{12} - 12(3^{11}) - (6)(11)(3^{10}) = 10,754,218$$

---

## Onto function

To count the number of onto functions, we can draw a parallel to the following problem:

A company hires 11 new employees, each of whom is to be assigned to one of four subdivisions. Each subdivision will get **at least one new employee**.

The question is **In how many ways can these assignments be made?**

We use the exponential generating function $f(x)$ to represent the arrangement for four subdivisions.

$$f(x) = \left(x + \frac{x^2}{2!} + \frac{x^3}{3!} + \frac{x^4}{4!} + \ldots \right)^4 = (e^x - 1)^4 = e^{4x} - 4e^{3x} + 6e^{2x} - 4e^x + 1$$

The answer then is the coefficient of $e^{11}/11!$ in $f(x)$:

$$4^{11} - 4(3^{11}) + 6(2^{11}) - 4(1^{11}) = \sum_{i=0}^{4}(-1)^i\binom{4}{i}(4-i)^{11}$$

And this problem is literally equivalent to counting the number of onto functions $g: X \rightarrow Y$ where $|X|=11$, $|Y|=4$.
